gh-109975: Make a rough editorial pass over What's New (#118711)
python/cpython: Doc/whatsnew/3.13.rst

* :pep:`696`: Type parameters (:data:`typing.TypeVar`, :data:`typing.ParamSpec`,
  and :data:`typing.TypeVarTuple`) now support defaults.

> 

Reviewer: This is probably on me but we need to mention PEP 705 here and PEP 696 (which is a syntax change) could use a more prominent mention.

Author: I've added a mention of PEP 705. I'm not sure what you want the entry for PEP 696 to say beyond what it says.

  :term:`global interpreter lock` disabled when built with ``--disable-gil``.
  See :ref:`Free-threaded CPython <free-threaded-cpython>` for more details.

Platform support:

* :pep:`730`: Apple's iOS is now an officially supported platform. Official
  Android support (:pep:`738`) is in the works as well.

> Important deprecations, removals or restrictions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Removed modules:
```
or
```suggestion
Module removals:
```
with schedule header added below.

Author: Done.

> * :ref:`PEP 594 <whatsnew313-pep594>`: The remaining 19 "dead batteries"

Reviewer: Maybe also mention 2to3 here, though it's not part of PEP 594.

Reviewer 3: Similarly, tkinter.tix was also removed.

Reviewer 2: 2to3 and tix are mentioned elsewhere in the document, but agree mention here also.

Author: Done.

  have been removed from the standard library:
  :mod:`!aifc`, :mod:`!audioop`, :mod:`!cgi`, :mod:`!cgitb`, :mod:`!chunk`,
  :mod:`!crypt`, :mod:`!imghdr`, :mod:`!mailcap`, :mod:`!msilib`, :mod:`!nis`,
  :mod:`!nntplib`, :mod:`!ossaudiodev`, :mod:`!pipes`, :mod:`!sndhdr`, :mod:`!spwd`,

>   :mod:`!sunau`, :mod:`!telnetlib`, :mod:`!uu` and :mod:`!xdrlib`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  :mod:`!sunau`, :mod:`!telnetlib`, :mod:`!uu` and :mod:`!xdrlib`.
  
  Other issues removed :mod:`!2to3` and  :mod:`!tkinter.tix`.
```

Author: Addressed with slightly different wording.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Release schedule:

```

Author: Done.

  :gh:`114099`.)

.. _whatsnew313-jit-compiler:

Experimental JIT Compiler
=========================

When CPython is configured using the ``--enable-experimental-jit`` option,
a just-in-time compiler is added which may speed up some Python programs.

The internal architecture is roughly as follows.

* We start with specialized *Tier 1 bytecode*.
  See :ref:`What's new in 3.11 <whatsnew311-pep659>` for details.

* When the Tier 1 bytecode gets hot enough, it gets translated
  to a new, purely internal *Tier 2 IR*, a.k.a. micro-ops ("uops").

* The Tier 2 IR uses the same stack-based VM as Tier 1, but the
  instruction format is better suited to translation to machine code.

* We have several optimization passes for Tier 2 IR, which are applied
  before it is interpreted or translated to machine code.

* There is a Tier 2 interpreter, but it is mostly intended for debugging
  the earlier stages of the optimization pipeline.
  The Tier 2 interpreter can be enabled by configuring Python
  with ``--enable-experimental-jit=interpreter``.

* When the JIT is enabled, the optimized
  Tier 2 IR is translated to machine code, which is then executed.

> * The machine code translation process uses an architecture called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The machine code translation process uses a technique called
```
Feels like a more appropriate term. Happy to stay with "architecture" if that's preferred for some reason though.

Author: Fixed.

  The interpreter can be disabled by running with
  ``PYTHON_JIT=0``.

(On Windows, use ``PCbuild/build.bat --experimental-jit`` to enable the JIT
or ``--experimental-jit-interpreter`` to enable the Tier 2 interpreter.)

See :pep:`744` for more details.

(JIT by Brandt Bucher, inspired by a paper by Haoran Xu and Fredrik Kjolstad.
Tier 2 IR by Mark Shannon and Guido van Rossum.
Tier 2 optimizer by Ken Jin.)

.. _free-threaded-cpython:

Free-threaded CPython
=====================

CPython will run with the :term:`global interpreter lock` (GIL) disabled when
configured using the ``--disable-gil`` option at build time. This is an
experimental feature and therefore isn't used by default. Users need to
either compile their own interpreter, or install one of the experimental
builds that are marked as *free-threaded*.

Free-threaded execution allows for full utilization of the available
processing power by running threads in parallel on available CPU cores.
While not all software will benefit from this automatically, programs
designed with threading in mind will run faster on multicore hardware.

Work is still ongoing: expect some bugs and a substantial single-threaded
performance hit.

> The free-threaded build still supports optionally running with GIL enabled at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The free-threaded build still supports optionally running with the GIL enabled at
```

Author: Fixed.

runtime using the environment variable :envvar:`PYTHON_GIL` or the command line
option :option:`-X gil`.

> * Use :func:`!sys._is_gil_enabled` to determine if the :term:`GIL` is enabled.

Reviewer: I'm not sure why these are bullet points.

Author: Yep, good point. Edited.

  * :mod:`!nis`.
    (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`104773`.)

  * :mod:`!nntplib`:
    the :pypi:`nntplib` PyPI project can be used instead.
    (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`104773`.)

  * :mod:`!ossaudiodev`: use the
    `pygame project <https://www.pygame.org/>`_ for audio playback.
    (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`104780`.)

  * :mod:`!pipes`: use the :mod:`subprocess` module instead.
    (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`104773`.)

  * :mod:`!sndhdr`: use the projects :pypi:`filetype`,
    :pypi:`puremagic`, or :pypi:`python-magic` instead.
    (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`104773`.)

  * :mod:`!spwd`:
    the :pypi:`python-pam` project can be used instead.
    (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`104773`.)

  * :mod:`!sunau`.
    (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`104773`.)

  * :mod:`!telnetlib`, use the projects :pypi:`telnetlib3 ` or
    :pypi:`Exscript` instead.
    (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`104773`.)

  * :mod:`!uu`: the :mod:`base64` module is a modern alternative.
    (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`104773`.)

  * :mod:`!xdrlib`.
    (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`104773`.)

> 2to3

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2to3 and tkinter.tix
```
Move tkinter entry here

Or split 'Removed Modules and APIs' into 2 headers.  There are no module removals scheduled for next few releases, so 'Removed Modules' will not be needed for awhile.

Author: I've merged the PEP 594 section with the other removals.

  This functionality was deprecated and made a no-op in Python 3.9.

re
--

* Remove undocumented, never working, and deprecated ``re.template`` function
  and ``re.TEMPLATE`` flag (and ``re.T`` alias).
  (Contributed by Serhiy Storchaka and Nikita Sobolev in :gh:`105687`.)

tkinter
-------

* Remove the :mod:`!tkinter.tix` module, deprecated in Python 3.6.  The
  third-party Tix library which the module wrapped is unmaintained.
  (Contributed by Zachary Ware in :gh:`75552`.)

turtle
------

* Remove the :meth:`!turtle.RawTurtle.settiltangle` method,
  deprecated in docs since Python 3.1
  and with a deprecation warning since Python 3.11.
  (Contributed by Hugo van Kemenade in :gh:`104876`.)

typing
------

* Namespaces ``typing.io`` and ``typing.re``, deprecated in Python 3.8,
  are now removed. The items in those namespaces can be imported directly
  from :mod:`typing`. (Contributed by Sebastian Rittau in :gh:`92871`.)

* Remove support for the keyword-argument method of creating
  :class:`typing.TypedDict` types, deprecated in Python 3.11.
  (Contributed by Tomas Roun in :gh:`104786`.)

unittest
--------

> * Removed the following :mod:`unittest` functions, deprecated in Python 3.11:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Remove the following :mod:`unittest` functions, deprecated in Python 3.11:
```

Author: Rah, passive versus active and present versus future voice. Well, fine.

  * :func:`!unittest.findTestCases`
  * :func:`!unittest.makeSuite`
  * :func:`!unittest.getTestCaseNames`

  Use :class:`~unittest.TestLoader` methods instead:

  * :meth:`unittest.TestLoader.loadTestsFromModule`
  * :meth:`unittest.TestLoader.loadTestsFromTestCase`
  * :meth:`unittest.TestLoader.getTestCaseNames`

  (Contributed by Hugo van Kemenade in :gh:`104835`.)

* Remove the untested and undocumented :meth:`!unittest.TestProgram.usageExit`
  method, deprecated in Python 3.11.
  (Contributed by Hugo van Kemenade in :gh:`104992`.)

urllib
------

* Remove *cafile*, *capath* and *cadefault* parameters of the
  :func:`urllib.request.urlopen` function, deprecated in Python 3.6: use the
  *context* parameter instead. Please use

>   :meth:`ssl.SSLContext.load_cert_chain` instead, or let

Reviewer: The two "instead"s here make it hard to understand what you're supposed to do.

Author: Agreed. Edited.

  :func:`ssl.create_default_context` select the system's trusted CA
  certificates for you.
  (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`105382`.)

webbrowser
----------

* Remove the untested and undocumented :mod:`webbrowser` :class:`!MacOSX` class,
  deprecated in Python 3.11.
  Use the :class:`!MacOSXOSAScript` class (introduced in Python 3.2) instead.
  (Contributed by Hugo van Kemenade in :gh:`104804`.)

* Remove deprecated ``webbrowser.MacOSXOSAScript._name`` attribute.
  Use :attr:`webbrowser.MacOSXOSAScript.name <webbrowser.controller.name>`
  attribute instead.
  (Contributed by Nikita Sobolev in :gh:`105546`.)

> Deprecated Modules And APIs

Reviewer 2: There are no depecated modules listed.
```suggestion
Deprecated APIs
```

Author: Changed it to 'New Deprecations' because it's more generic and I like the apparent contradiction.

  (Contributed by Erlend Aasland in :gh:`105875`.)

* Python built with :file:`configure` :option:`--with-trace-refs` (tracing
  references) is now ABI compatible with the Python release build and
  :ref:`debug build <debug-build>`.
  (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`108634`.)

* Building CPython now requires a compiler with support for the C11 atomic
  library, GCC built-in atomic functions, or MSVC interlocked intrinsics.

* The ``errno``, ``fcntl``, ``grp``, ``md5``, ``pwd``, ``resource``,
  ``termios``, ``winsound``,
  ``_ctypes_test``, ``_multiprocessing.posixshmem``, ``_scproxy``, ``_stat``,
  ``_statistics``, ``_testconsole``, ``_testimportmultiple`` and ``_uuid``
  C extensions are now built with the :ref:`limited C API <limited-c-api>`.
  (Contributed by Victor Stinner in :gh:`85283`.)

* ``wasm32-wasi`` is now a :pep:`11` tier 2 platform.
  (Contributed by Brett Cannon in :gh:`115192`.)

* ``wasm32-emscripten`` is no longer a :pep:`11` supported platform.
  (Contributed by Brett Cannon in :gh:`115192`.)

* Python now bundles the `mimalloc library <https://github.com/microsoft/mimalloc>`__.

>   It is licensed under the MIT license, see :ref:`mimalloc license <mimalloc-license>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It is licensed under the MIT license; see :ref:`mimalloc license <mimalloc-license>`.
```

Author: Done.

>   The bundled mimalloc has custom changes, see :gh:`113141` for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The bundled mimalloc has custom changes; see :gh:`113141` for details.
```

Author: Done.

  use :meth:`~zipimport.zipimporter.exec_module` instead.

> CPython Bytecode Changes

Reviewer 4: Surely there are more changes to this type of bytecode details. Maybe Irit can help auditing this.

Porting to Python 3.13

> ======================

Reviewer 5: I suggest to move this section before Build Changes.

Author: Agreed, done.

This section lists previously described changes and other bugfixes
that may require changes to your code.

Changes in the Python API
-------------------------

* An :exc:`OSError` is now raised by :func:`getpass.getuser` for any failure to
  retrieve a username, instead of :exc:`ImportError` on non-Unix platforms or
  :exc:`KeyError` on Unix platforms where the password database is empty.

* The :mod:`threading` module now expects the :mod:`!_thread` module to have
  an ``_is_main_interpreter`` attribute.  It is a function with no

>   arguments that return ``True`` if the current interpreter is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  arguments that returns ``True`` if the current interpreter is the
```

Author: Done.
